Edit cli readme (#663)
redwoodjs/redwood: packages/cli/README.md

# Command Line Interface

<!-- toc -->
- [Purpose and Vision](#Purpose-and-Vision)
- [Package Lead](#Package-Lead)
- [Roadmap](#Roadmap)
- [Contributing](#Contributing)
- [FAQ](#FAQ)

## Purpose and Vision

Redwood provides a first-class CLI that helps you at every stage of development, from your first commit to your first deploy. And it comes with Redwood, which means no extra software to install!

> Redwood uses [yarn workspaces](https://yarnpkg.com/features/workspaces) to separate your app's sides, generators give you a smooth DX, and Prisma to manage your database. We have a generator for nearly everything, on both sides of the app, from components to functions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Redwood uses [yarn workspaces](https://yarnpkg.com/features/workspaces) to separate your app's sides, generators that give you a smooth DX, and Prisma to manage your database. We have a generator for nearly everything, on both sides of the app, from components to functions.
```

Author: Thanks I totally missed this. Thinking we'll go with "to" for parallelism.

## Contributing

Redwood's CLI is built with [Yargs](http://yargs.js.org/). While you'll want to be familiar with it before contributing, we suggest reading the [Adding a Command](#adding-a-command) section of this guide before consulting the yargs docs since we largely use the advanced api.

### Setting up your local dev environment

<!-- TODO--the other way rob mentioned? -->
We built a command line tool just for contributing! Check out the top-level [contributing](https://github.com/redwoodjs/redwood/blob/master/packages/cli/README.md) guide to set up your local development environment.

### About the Advanced API

We use the [advanced yargs api](https://github.com/yargs/yargs/blob/master/docs/advanced.md). This means that instead of seeing things written as a method chain, with the `command` method doing most of the work, like:

```javascript
yargs
  .command(
    'get',
    'make a get HTTP request',
    function (yargs) {
      return yargs.option('u', {
        alias: 'url',
        describe: 'the URL to make an HTTP request to'
      })
    },
    function (argv) {
      console.log(argv.url)
    }
  )
  .help()
  .argv
```

> you'll see the arguments to the `command`  method spread across named, exported constants, like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
you'll see the arguments to the `command` method spread across named and exported constants, like:
```

Author: Thinking we'll just take out "named" here since that part is starting to seem obvious.

```javascript
export const command = 'get'
export const description = 'make a get HTTP request'
export const builder = (yargs) => {
  return yargs.option('u', {
    alias: 'url',
    describe: 'the URL to make an HTTP request to'
  })
}
export const handler = (argv) => {
  console.log(argv.url)
}
```

> It helps to know this before consulting the yargs doc, as most of the it's written in the former api instead of the latter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It helps to know this before consulting the yargs doc, as most of it is written using the former api instead of the latter.
```

Author: +1 for "in -> using". For "it's -> it is", contractions make the writing more conversational, although I'm guilty of misusing them. Motion to keep the contraction?

Reviewer: I agree that the contractions make it feel more conversational and friendly. That's why I kept most of them. But sometimes I feel they make the text more difficult to read. This is one of those places. However, I'm not a native English speaker, so I'll leave this to someone else to settle 👨‍⚖️

<!-- TODO--api's -->
To get a good sense of the difference between api's, compare [redwood-tools.js](https://github.com/redwoodjs/redwood/blob/master/packages/cli/src/redwood-tools.js) to [dev.js](https://github.com/redwoodjs/redwood/blob/master/packages/cli/src/commands/dev.js), or any other command. 

#### Best Practices

There's a few best practices we follow that you should be aware of:

- **Use `description` instead of `desc` or `describe`:** While yargs accepts any of these names, for consistency, use `description`
- **descriptions shouldn't end in periods:** Again, just a stylistic choice&mdash;but stick to it!
- **`builder` should be a function:** This enables the positional api (more on that later)

> If none of these make sense yet, don't worry! You'll see them come up in the next section where we you walk through adding a command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If none of these make sense yet, don't worry! You'll see them come up in the next section where we walk you through adding a command.
```

|`description`|string|A description of the command; shown in the help message|
|`builder`|function|Effectively "builds" the command's arguments/options|
|`handler`|function|The function invoked by the command; does all the work|

We'll continue to use the `build` command as an example as we discuss each of these individually. You can find `build`'s source code in full [here ](https://github.com/redwoodjs/redwood/blob/master/packages/cli/src/commands/build.js).

#### command

`command` is a string that represents the command at the CLI and effectively maps it to the handler that does the work.

The command for `build` is:

```
export const command = 'build [side..]'
```

<!-- TODO -->
`'build'`, the first word in the string, specifies the name of the command, and `'[side..]'` indicates that `build` takes an optional positional argument (named `side`--relevant for the `builder` and the `handler`). The dots (`..`) trailing `side` indicate that you can provide an array of strings (see [Variadic Positional Arguments](https://github.com/yargs/yargs/blob/master/docs/advanced.md#variadic-positional-arguments)), for example:

> <!-- The square brakcets indicate that the `build` takes an optional positional argument named `side` (relevant for `builder` and `handler`). The dots (`..`) trailing `side` indicate that you can provide an array of strings (see [Variadic Positional Arguments](https://github.com/yargs/yargs/blob/master/docs/advanced.md#variadic-positional-arguments)), for example: -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<!-- The square brackets indicate that `build` takes an optional positional argument named `side` (relevant for `builder` and `handler`). The dots (`..`) trailing `side` indicate that you can provide an array of strings (see [Variadic Positional Arguments](https://github.com/yargs/yargs/blob/master/docs/advanced.md#variadic-positional-arguments)), for example: -->
```

```
yarn rw build api web
```

You can use angle brackets (`<>`) to indicate that a positional argument is required. For example,

```
export const command = 'build <side>'
```

makes invoking `build` without any arguments, like

```
yarn rw build
```

fail. See [Positional Arguments](https://github.com/yargs/yargs/blob/master/docs/advanced.md#positional-arguments) for all your options when it comes specifying arguments for commands.

#### description

`description` is a string that's shown in the help output. `build`'s description is

```
export const description = 'Build for production'
```

And runnning `yarn rw build help` outputs:

```
rw build [side..]

Build for production
...
```

> Other than that, there's not much more to it. You should of course make the description descriptive. And for consistency, don't punctuate the it. I.e., we prefer this

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Other than that, there's not much more to it. You should of course make the description descriptive. And for consistency, don't punctuate it. I.e., we prefer this
```

```
export const description = 'Build for production'
```

to this

```
export const description = 'Build for production.'
```

#### builder

`builder` configures the positional arguments and options for the command. 

> While `builder` can be an object, the [positional argument api](https://yargs.js.org/docs/#api-positionalkey-opt) is only available if buidler's a function, so that's what we go with. We'll discuss more about builder being an object when we talk about testing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While `builder` can be an object, the [positional argument api](https://yargs.js.org/docs/#api-positionalkey-opt) is only available if builder's a function, so that's what we go with. We'll discuss more about builder being an object when we talk about testing.
```

Here's an excerpt of `build`'s `builder`:

```javascript
// ./src/commands/build.js

export const builder = (yargs) => {
  yargs
    .positional('side', {
      choices: ['api', 'web'],
      default: optionDefault(apiExists, webExists),
      description: 'Which side(s) to build',
      type: 'array',
    })
    ...
```

Using `.positional` api, you can configure `side`: what the user's allowed to pass (`choices`) what `side` defaults to if the user passes nothing (`default`), etc.

You should always specify the `description` and `type` properties. The rest depends. But generally, if you can fill out more, you should.

> While `side` would've worked in a bare-bones kind of way if we didn't do this, `builder`'s the only way to let the command know about it's options (only showing the relevant bits here):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While `side` would've worked in a bare-bones kind of way if we didn't do this, `builder`'s the only way to let the command know about its options (only showing the relevant bits here):
```

        'Webpack Bundle Analyzer',
        'https://github.com/webpack-contrib/webpack-bundle-analyzer'
      )}`,
      type: 'boolean',
    })
    .option('verbose', {
      alias: 'v',
      default: false,
      description: 'Print more',
      type: 'boolean',
    })
    ...
}
```

These two calls to `.options` sets up this command to have options `--stats` and `--verbose`. So now calls like

```
yarn rw build --stats
yarn rw build --verbose
```

are perfectly valid. 

For the full list of what properties you can pass to the options object, see [options(key, [opt])](https://yargs.js.org/docs/#api-optionskey-opt).

#### handler

<!-- ends? -->
`handler`'s what actually does the work of the command. It's where all the logic goes.

More concretely, `handler`'s a function that gets passed the positional arguments and options specified and configured in `command` and `builder`.

While `build`'s `handler` is too long to reproduce here in full, to get the point across, here's the signature:

```javascript
// ./src/cli/commands/build.js

export const handler = async ({
  side = ['api', 'web'],
  verbose = false,
  stats = false,
}) => {
  ...
}
```

> The logic that goes in a command's `handler`'s varies too much to comment on generally. But you'll see similarities among the handlers of commands that do similar things, like generators. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The logic that goes in a command's `handler` varies too much to comment on generally. But you'll see similarities among the handlers of commands that do similar things, like generators. 
```

<!-- ### builder and testing

> While we want you to export `builder` as a function, you can use a `builderObject` to define the ags/options.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While we want you to export `builder` as a function, you can use a `builderObject` to define the arguments/options.
```

export const aliases = ['g']
export const description = 'Save time by generating boilerplate code'
import terminalLink from 'terminal-link'

export const builder = (yargs) =>
  yargs
    .commandDir('./generate', { recurse: true })
    .demandCommand()
    .epilogue(
      `Also see the ${terminalLink(
        'Redwood CLI Reference',
        'https://redwoodjs.com/reference/command-line-interface#generate-alias-g'
      )}`
    )

```

The call to `commandDir` is what makes this command an entry point. You can read more about `commandDir` [here](https://github.com/yargs/yargs/blob/master/docs/advanced.md#commanddirdirectory-opts).

> The second argument to `commandDir`, `{ recurse: true }` is specific to the `generate` command because each of the commands in the `generate` directory is in its own directory to keep things organized--more on this in [Adding a Generator](#adding-a-generator).

Now all the commands in the `generate` directory will be arguments to the `generate` command:

```
./src/commands/generate
├── auth
├── cell
├── component
├── function
├── helpers.js
├── layout
├── page
├── README.md
├── scaffold
├── sdl
├── service
└── __tests__
```

> There's files and directories here that aren't yargs related&mdash;`README.md`, `helper.js`, and `__tests__`, but because yargs will only use the files that export the appropriate constants, it's ok.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are files and directories here that aren't yargs related&mdash;`README.md`, `helper.js`, and `__tests__`, but because yargs will only use the files that export the appropriate constants, that's ok.
```

Compare the `generate` command to [redwood-tools](https://github.com/redwoodjs/redwood/blob/master/packages/cli/src/redwood-tools.js)&mdash;another entry point command, but one that has all its logic in a single file.

### Adding a Generator

> We're about to refactor generators out of @redwoodjs/cli and into their own package, so a lot of this section will probably change soon.

You can add a generator by creating a directory and file in `./src/commands/generate`
Although it's not necessary, the directory and file should be named after the command that invokes it (for consistency).
For example, the page generator, which is invoked with

```
yarn redwood generate page 
```

lives in `./src/commands/generate/page/page.js`, where the `page` directory has the following structure:

```terminal
src/commands/generate/page
├── page.js
├── templates
└── __tests__
```

> Since a typical generator writes files, needs templates to do so, and needs tests to ensure it works, we use this command-in-a-directory structure to keep things organized. The entry-point command, `generate.js`, will stil be able to find these command files (here `page.js`) because of the second argument (`{ recurse: true }`) to `commandDir`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since a typical generator writes files, needs templates to do so, and needs tests to ensure it works, we use this command-in-a-directory structure to keep things organized. The entry-point command, `generate.js`, will still be able to find these command files (here `page.js`) because of the second argument (`{ recurse: true }`) to `commandDir`.
```

The templates for the files created by generators go in `templates`, should be named after the file they create, and end in `.template` to avoid being compiled by Babel.

```terminal
src/commands/generate/page/template
├── page.js.template
└── test.js.template
```

The templates are processed with lodash's [template](https://lodash.com/docs#template) function. You can use ES template literal delimiters (`${}`) as interpolation delimiters:

```javascript
// ./src/commands/generate/page/template/page.js.template

const ${singularPascalName}Page = () => {
...
```

The variables referenced in the template must be named the same as what's passed to the `generateTemplate` function, which is usually wrapped in a few functions but generally accessible via the respective generator's `files` function.
<!-- in the `...rest` parameter. -->

More complicated generators, like auth, will have a little more logic in their directories:

```terminal
src/commands/generate/auth
├── auth.js
├── providers
├── templates
└── __tests__
```

#### Testing Generators

If you're adding a new generator or modifying an existing one, you're gonna wanna test it! (Well, at least we want you to.)

<!-- inc -->

> We use [Jest](https://jestjs.io/docs/en/getting-started.html), so you'll want to be familiar with it's api.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We use [Jest](https://jestjs.io/docs/en/getting-started.html), so you'll want to be familiar with its api.
```

    - [dbCommands](#dbcommands)
    - [redwood-tools](#redwood-tools)
    - [Converting to TypeScript](#converting-to-typescript)
      - [Generators](#generators)
    - [What about...](#what-about)
      - [index.js](#indexjs)
      - [src/lib/colors.js](#srclibcolorsjs)
      <!-- - [src/lib/index.js](#srclibindexjs) -->
      <!-- - [src/lib/test.js](#srclibtestjs) -->
  - [FAQ](#faq)
    - [I want to alias `yarn rw`](#i-want-to-alias-yarn-rw)
    - [Can I customize the generators?](#can-i-customize-the-generators)

## Purpose and Vision

Redwood provides a first-class CLI that helps you at every stage of development, from your first commit to your first deploy. And it comes with Redwood, which means no extra software to install!

Redwood uses [yarn workspaces](https://yarnpkg.com/features/workspaces) to separate your app's sides, generators to give you a smooth DX, and [Prisma](https://www.prisma.io/) to manage your database. We have a generator for nearly everything, on both sides of the app, from components to functions.

Since the CLI is the entry point to Redwood, as Redwood continues to grow&mdash;especially as we add more sides and targets&mdash;so will the CLI.

> ## Package Lead

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Package Leads
```

- [@cannikin](https://github.com/cannikin)
- [@peterp](https://github.com/peterp)

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[@thedavidprice](https://github.com/thedavidprice)
```

You can find a list of its commands in the top-level [contributing](https://github.com/redwoodjs/redwood/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md) guide. If you're contributing to `redwood-tools`, you're contributing in a way that helps people contribute, which is pretty meta.

As mentioned, redwood-tools uses the "regular" yargs api, which is defined by method-chaining.
Adding a command here just entails adding another `command` method before the calls to `demandCommand` and `strict` at the end:

```javascript
// ./src/commands/redwood-tools.js

...

.command(
  ['hello', 'h'],
  'Say hi',
  {},
  () => console.log('hi!')
)
.demandCommand()
.strict().argv
```

Contrived example aside, any command you add here should help people contribute to Redwood.

### Converting to TypeScript

We're in the midst of converting Redwood to TypeScript. If you're interested, we'd love your help! You can track our progress and see where you can contribute [here](https://github.com/redwoodjs/redwood/issues/523).

#### Generators

If you're converting a generator, read the _Goals_ section of tracking issue [#523](https://github.com/redwoodjs/redwood/issues/523); it details some specs you should comply with.

> Some of the generators have already have been converted; use them as a reference (linking to the PRs here):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some of the generators have already been converted; use them as a reference (linking to the PRs here):
```

Author: Nice catch!

If none of these make sense yet, don't worry! You'll see them come up in the next section, where we walk you through adding a command.

### Adding a Command

You can add a command by creating a file in [./src/commands](https://github.com/redwoodjs/redwood/tree/master/packages/cli/src/commands). Although it's not necessary, for consistency, the file should be named after the command that invokes it. For example, the build command, which is invoked with

```terminal
yarn rw build 
```

lives in [./src/commands/build.js](https://github.com/redwoodjs/redwood/blob/master/packages/cli/src/commands/build.js).

<!-- [todo] -->
<!-- Add alias here? Not required tho -->
To make a command using the advanced api, yargs requires that you export [four constants](https://github.com/yargs/yargs/blob/master/docs/advanced.md#providing-a-command-module):

|Constant|Type|Description|
|:-|:-|:-|
|`command`|string|A yargs command definition. You specify the command's name and arguments here|
|`description`|string|A description of the command; shown in the help message|
|`builder`|function|Effectively "builds" the command's arguments/options|

> |`handler`|function|The function invoked by the command; does all the work|

Reviewer 3: I think there's a markdown formatter available in vscode that'll make these easier to read.

Author: Thanks, just did that. Looks so much better. I 'll have to do that across the docs/from now on.

Turns out I had the extension already but wasn't using the keyboard shortcut to trigger the formatter.

- [@cannikin](https://github.com/cannikin)
- [@peterp](https://github.com/peterp)

> [@thedavidprice](https://github.com/thedavidprice)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [@thedavidprice](https://github.com/thedavidprice)
```
